FR #962: Add Correction Handling and Delivery Handling attributes and refactor Invoice Handling (#1501)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/correction_handling.md

### Correction Styles

FOCUS recognizes three styles for handling corrections within subsequent *dataset artifacts*:

| Correction Style | Delivery Mechanism | Correction Style Description                                                                                                                                              |
| ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Previously delivered records are not corrected individually; each delivery provides a complete snapshot and supersedes any previously delivered data within the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope). |
| Delta            | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records applied during aggregation and may include supplemental records as needed. |

> | Ledger           | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records representing explicit reversals and re-entries, applied during aggregation, and may include supplemental records as needed. |

Reviewer: Should FOCUS stay neutral on the choice of the style or position to recommend the Leger style, as it is the most auditable (use of SHOULD keyword)?

Reviewer 2: @marc-perreaut thanks for catching and pointing this out.

I believe we should stay neutral. Rather than recommending any specific style, I intended to describe characteristics and with many iterations I inadvertently left out the mention of the impact on data volume.

In the updated version I've added data volume characteristics alongside the existing auditability observations for each style. This makes the tradeoff between auditability and data volume visible to practitioners without favoring any particular style. Each style now describes both its auditability and data volume characteristics.

Here are the specific additions:

**Delivery Handling:**

Overwrite:
> *Dataset artifact size typically increases within a delivery scope as underlying data accumulates, but total data volume remains the lowest compared to Append delivery as each dataset artifact supersedes previously delivered ones for the same delivery scope.*

Append:
> *Total data volume increases over time as all delivered dataset artifacts are preserved, and is typically higher compared to Overwrite delivery.*
 
**Correction Handling:**

Replacement:
> *Dataset artifact size typically increases within a delivery scope as underlying data accumulates, but total data volume remains the lowest compared to other correction styles as each dataset artifact supersedes previously delivered ones for the same delivery scope.*

Delta:
> *Total data volume increases over time as all delivered dataset artifacts are preserved, and is typically higher compared to Replacement corrections but lower compared to Ledger corrections.*

Ledger:
> *Total data volume increases over time as all delivered dataset artifacts are preserved, and is typically the highest compared to other correction styles as each correction requires explicit reversal and re-entry records.*

Thanks again for flagging this! Please let me know if this addresses your concern and if I can close the thread.

Reviewer: Hello, @ijurica ,
I understand the approach and it works for me, thanks.
This comment can be resolved.

# Correction Handling

## Overview

The Correction Handling attribute defines how [*corrections*](#glossary:correction) to previously delivered FOCUS [*dataset artifacts*](#glossary:dataset-artifact) are represented in subsequent deliveries.

> *Corrections* may consist of one or more simultaneous changes, including updates to or omission of previously delivered records, or the addition of new records that supplement previously delivered data within the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope) (e.g., temporal grouping such as a [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period) or non-temporal, logical grouping such as a [*contract*](#glossary:contract)). This concept applies across all [*FOCUS datasets*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset).

Author: An attribute is tied to a FOCUS dataset via normative requirements at the dataset level.  The declaration that this attribute applies to all datasets feels therefore misleading.

```suggestion
*Corrections* may consist of one or more simultaneous changes, including updates to or omission of previously delivered records, or the addition of new records that supplement previously delivered data within the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope) (e.g., temporal grouping such as a [*billing period*](#glossary:billing-period) or non-temporal, logical grouping such as a [*contract*](#glossary:contract)).
```

Accurate correction handling is essential to ensure the consistency, integrity, and usability of *FOCUS datasets* over time. Depending on the dataset and delivery configuration, it supports a range of key outcomes, including but not limited to:

* Consistency of delivered data - ensuring that delivered data remains consistent and reliable over time, where applicable, including alignment between related *FOCUS datasets* (e.g., [Invoice Detail](#datasets.invoicedetail) records and the underlying [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage) records).
* Data integrity and [*invoice reconciliation*](#glossary:invoice-reconciliation) - ensuring that corrections do not compromise records associated with [*issued invoices*](#glossary:issued-invoice) and that alignment is maintained in accordance with defined *invoice reconciliation* requirements.
* Auditability and traceability - enabling the tracking of delivered data and applied corrections over time, so that changes and their effects can be understood, verified, and correctly reflected in downstream processes (e.g., cost allocation, chargeback, reporting).

> ### Correction Styles

Author: ```suggestion
## Correction Styles
```

Reviewer 2: That was actually the intentional design - keeping H2s generic and consistent across all attributes (Overview, Attribute ID, Attribute Name, Description, Requirements, Exceptions, Introduced), with attribute-specific details under H3s. 

Would you mind if we keep it as-is?

Author: We _can_ keep it as-is... but then any anchor links to Correction Styles follow this pattern:

> #attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections

And that feels strange to me, shoving that Overview in the middle.  Would it not be cleaner to go with:

> #attributes.correctionhandling.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections

Author: Resolving with no action.

| ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Previously delivered records are not corrected individually; each delivery provides a complete snapshot and supersedes any previously delivered data within the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope). |
| Delta            | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records applied during aggregation and may include supplemental records as needed. |
| Ledger           | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records representing explicit reversals and re-entries, applied during aggregation, and may include supplemental records as needed. |

For more information on delivery mechanisms for *dataset artifacts*, see the [Delivery Handling attribute](#deliveryhandling).

> #### Replacement Corrections

Author: ```suggestion
### Replacement Corrections
```

Reviewer 2: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

In the Replacement correction style, a *dataset artifact* uses the Overwrite delivery mechanism to provide a complete snapshot of data for a given *delivery scope*, based on the data available at the time of delivery.

Any given *dataset artifact* completely replaces all previous *dataset artifacts* for the same *delivery scope* to reflect updates, additions, or omissions relative to the previous snapshot. The practitioner only needs to reference the most recent *dataset artifact* for a given *delivery scope* in order to see a complete view; all previously delivered *dataset artifacts* for that *delivery scope* are considered obsolete and can be safely ignored.

Given that changes are not presented as separate entries, this style lacks inherent auditability.

> #### Delta Corrections

Author: ```suggestion
### Delta Corrections
```

Reviewer 2: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

In the Delta correction style, a *dataset artifact* uses the Append delivery mechanism to provide additive records for a given *delivery scope*, based on the data available at the time of delivery.

All previously delivered *dataset artifacts* are preserved, and corrections are expressed as additive records that are applied during aggregation. These records effectively increase or decrease values in selected additive metrics (e.g., cost- and quantity-related columns) of previously delivered records, or supplement previously delivered records, all within the same *delivery scope*. The practitioner must reference all *dataset artifacts* delivered for a given *delivery scope* in order to see a complete and accurate view.

Given that only net changes are presented and previously delivered records are not explicitly reversed, the Delta correction style provides limited inherent auditability compared to Ledger corrections.

> #### Ledger Corrections

Author: ```suggestion
### Ledger Corrections
```

Reviewer 2: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

All previously delivered *dataset artifacts* are preserved, and corrections are expressed as additive records that reflect explicit reversals and re-entries, applied during aggregation. These records effectively increase or decrease values in selected additive metrics (e.g., cost- and quantity-related columns) of previously delivered records, or supplement previously delivered records, all within the same *delivery scope*. The practitioner must reference all *dataset artifacts* delivered for a given *delivery scope* in order to see a complete and accurate view.

Given that the entire change history is presented, the Ledger correction style provides full inherent auditability.

### Corrections to Issued Invoices

> Corrections to data in FOCUS Invoice Detail and Cost and Usage *dataset artifacts* associated with an *issued invoice* that would affect the integrity of the *issued invoice* representation or invalidate the *invoice reconciliation* performed by the [*invoice issuer*](#glossary:invoice-issuer) prior to invoice issuance may only be applied if the corresponding [Invoice Status](#datasets.invoicedetail.invoicestatus) (within Invoice Detail *FOCUS dataset*) transitions from "Closed" to "Open". Such a transition must be explicitly requested or approved by the customer to ensure auditability, traceability, and the integrity of *invoice reconciliation*.

Reviewer 3: This needs to change. We cannot say that vendors cannot correct data for a billing periods that are closed. What if the invoice says that it is closed but the dataset is missing 10m records. We can't tell the vendor that they can't fix the data.  We have talked at length about this in the past. 

I don't think we gain much by allowing transition from closed to open. Is the sole purpose of this to allow corrections? 

If we are also implying that there is a functional dependency that is bi-directional between the focus cost and usage datasets and a monetization system, we are mistaken. The linkage between systems that deliver FOCUS datasets (or similar) and the system that tracks usage, calculates cost and generates invoices is a real thing. However, the system delivering focus relies on the monetization system, not the other way around.  There can be delays, update issues, problems on the customers side that are specific on the delivery and reporting side. The monetization side can be just fine (the separation is a good idea). 

I would suggest that we have a classification for corrections that allows vendors to indicate that they have made a correction and the nature of the correction, rather than full on saying that a correction can't happen.

Reviewer 2: Yes, we have been discussing this topic for a long time. After reading the last sentence in this comment, it appears that we may not be aligned on what is actually being proposed.

* With the correction-handling attribute, our intention is to ensure that, in case of corrections to a closed billing period, there is **at least a clear signal that a correction has occurred**.
  * My understanding throughout our discussion was that your concern was that this is too strong a requirement.
  * However, in the latest comment, **you suggest not only signaling that a correction occurred, but also introducing a classification that captures the reason for the correction**. That seems to go a step further than what we are proposing.

* Additionally, it appears that there are concerns (raised by both Riley and Sai) about requiring that, when correcting a previous billing period, the correction charge must be associated with a subsequent billing period.
  * I would like to reiterate the distinction between **Billing Period** and **Charge Period**. Billing Period is defined as the time window that an organization receives an invoice for... **independent of the time of usage and consumption of resources and services**.
  * This distinction is critical to understanding why associating the correction charge with a subsequent billing period does not prevent proper temporal attribution. (see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2836409487) for more context)

---

## Detailed Response to Comment

> This needs to change. We cannot say that vendors cannot correct data for billing periods that are closed. What if the invoice says that it is closed but the dataset is missing 10m records. We can't tell the vendor that they can't fix the data. We have talked at length about this in the past.

We are not saying that vendors cannot correct data for closed billing periods. Rather, we are emphasizing the importance of traceability and auditability once a billing period is marked as closed, specifically limited to corrections that affect invoice reconciliation (e.g., updates to `BilledCost` or other financially material values).

Vendors have different options to provide corrections:

* **Option A (Fully transparent and auditable):**  
  A correction can be provided via a charge with **ChargeClass = "Correction"** in a subsequent open billing period for a closed billing period.

* **Option B (Less transparent and auditable):**  
  As previously mentioned in this thread, PR #1900 currently proposes two allowed values for `InvoiceStatus` and `BillingPeriodStatus` — **Open** and **Closed**.  
  I suggest we consider distinguishing **Open**, **Closed-Provisional**, and **Closed-Final**:

  * **Closed-Provisional:** Operationally closed, but further corrections may occur. In this case, there may be no guaranteed audit trail, but the status clearly communicates that the period is not financially finalized.

  * **Closed-Final:** Closed and guaranteed not to change without explicit request or approval. Updates are allowed only in agreement with the customer.

The goal is not to change operational behavior overnight, but to raise transparency and auditability by making financial finality explicit and visible in the data model (explicitly represented in the data, not only described in documentation or contract).

Just a reminder:

**Closed Billing Period != Closed for Analytical Attribution**

* A Closed Billing Period signals financial finality for reporting purposes.
* It does not remove the ability to attribute a charge to the period in which it was effective, because `ChargePeriod` retains that temporal information.

> I don't think we gain much by allowing transition from closed to open. Is the sole purpose of this to allow corrections?

**Rationale for Introducing the Closed → Open Transition:**

* It addresses edge cases where corrections to closed billing periods need to be applied in the same manner as for open periods.  
  (This approach reduces transparency and auditability compared to the default correction mechanism.)

* With this approach, previously defined `MUST` requirements remain in effect and define the standard behavior for closed billing periods, ensuring that edge cases do not require weakening a `MUST` to a `SHOULD`.

For reference, one of the relevant requirements under consideration is:

* `InvoiceDetail.InvoiceDetailCreated` for the given `InvoiceDetail.BillingPeriodStart` and `InvoiceDetail.InvoiceIssuerName` MUST be earlier than or equal to `BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodLastUpdated` for the same `BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStart` and `BillingPeriod.InvoiceIssuerName` when `BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStatus` is "Closed".

Reviewer 2: @rileyjenk can I close this thread in favor of [this one](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2975392671)

Author: Discussed this thread in Mar 24 TF-1.  Several iterations have been performed since this thread was opened, but have not heard back from @rileyjenk on @ijurica's reply from Feb 22.

@rileyjenk Please let us know if we can resolve this thread.

Author: Discussed in Mar 31 TF-1.  We believe this was addressed weeks ago via previous revisions, and we have not heard from the commenter since the last TF-1.  Resolving.

> 

Reviewer 4: The phrasing  ( explicitly requested or approved) suggests creation of a new operational requirement that would be hard to implement, can we make this more generic to state that a provider can make this decision based on existing customer policies /agreements between customers and data generators

Reviewer 2: see this [comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2837773665)

Reviewer 4: responded in the other thread

Reviewer 2: @pydi-aws is it ok if I resolve this thread

Corrections to underlying records that do not impact *invoice reconciliation* are allowed regardless of Invoice Status, but even in this case they may reduce auditability and traceability or affect downstream processes (e.g., cost allocation, chargeback, reporting).

See [Appendix: Invoice Handling](#appendix.invoicehandling) for more details regarding consistency and integrity of delivered Invoice Detail and Cost and Usage *dataset artifacts* for *issued invoices*.

> ### Corrections to Closed Billing Periods

Author: ```suggestion
## Corrections to Closed Billing Periods
```

Reviewer 2: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156)

Author: Resolving with no action.

> Corrections to previously *closed billing periods* that would require issuing additional [*invoices*](#glossary:invoice) may only be applied if the corresponding [BillingPeriodStatus](#datasets.billingperiod.billingperiodstatus) (within [Billing Period](#datasets.billingperiod) *FOCUS dataset*) transitions from "Closed" to "Open". Such a transition must be explicitly requested or approved by the customer to ensure auditability, traceability, and the integrity of financial reporting.

Reviewer 4: same comment as above - The phrasing ( explicitly requested or approved) suggests creation of a new operational requirement that would be hard to implement, can we make this more generic to state that a provider can make this decision based on existing customer policies /agreements between customers and data generators

Reviewer 3: I agree. I am concerned that we are going to hit a wall with this to point that vendors will not be able to adopt focus because of this.

Reviewer 2: I hear you.

Considering that in practice, we have three distinct scenarios:

* **Scenario 1:** Material corrections to closed billing periods (e.g., BilledCost update), implemented as **replacement of the artifact in the same manner as for open billing periods**, **without consulting the customer** (limited traceability and auditability).  
* **Scenario 2:** Material corrections, implemented as replacement in the same manner as for open billing periods, that are **guaranteed not to occur without prior customer consultation** (traceability and auditability remain limited, but the customer is consulted).  
* **Scenario 3:** Corrections to closed billing periods performed via **charges with ChargeClass = "Correction"**, associated with a subsequent open billing period. This approach provides traceability and auditability.

I propose that we reflect the distinction between **Scenario 1 and Scenario 2** explicitly in the dataset, rather than only in documentation or contracts.

As mentioned in a different thread, we can achieve this in PR #1900 by introducing **three allowed values** for `InvoiceStatus` / `BillingPeriodStatus` instead of the current two:

* **Open:** Costs and usage data may still change.  
* **Closed-Provisional:** Operationally closed, but may be reopened **without prior customer consultation** (captures Scenario 1: replacement-style corrections for closed periods).  
* **Closed-Final:** Closed and guaranteed not to be reopened **without prior customer consultation** (captures Scenario 2: controlled replacement-style corrections for closed periods).

When/if we agree to introduce a distinction between **Closed-Provisional** and **Closed-Final**, we can further refine the wording in the Correction Handling attribute. The updated requirements could be expressed as follows:

* *FOCUS dataset* **MUST** ensure that `BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStatus` for a *closed billing period* transitions from **Closed-Final → Open** only if explicitly requested or approved by the customer.
* *FOCUS dataset* **MAY** allow `BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStatus` for a *closed billing period* to transition from **Closed-Provisional → Open** without requiring explicit request or approval from the customer.

Reviewer 4: In practice, some corrections happen without customer consultation (pricing adjustments) and others require it (billing changes). Rather than trying to classify these upfront in the spec, would it be simpler to state a default  - "corrections are applied to the appropriate billing period as per the provider's policy"? That keeps the spec generic and implementable across providers, while still giving practitioners a clear expectation without needing to enumerate every scenario.

Reviewer 2: With the introduction of the two variations of the Closed status, my intention was to propose a way to **enhance transparency* - rather than leaving this solely documented on the provider’s website, in policies, or in agreements between provider and customer, it would also be explicitly reflected in the InvoiceDetailStatus and BillingPeriodStatus. 

In other words, we’re not changing the underlying behavior — just making it more transparent

Reviewer 4: Thanks @ijurica, this works for us. Since the underlying correction behavior doesn't change and this is about making existing provider practices transparent in the data, we're good with this approach. Happy to close this thread and continue the discussion in PR #1900.

Corrections that do not impact the integrity of the closed billing period, such as informational or metadata updates, are allowed regardless of BillingPeriodStatus.

> If the original closed period is not reopened, corrections that require issuing additional invoices must always be represented in the context of a subsequent *open billing period*.

Reviewer 4: This codifies the BillingPeriod separation approach where corrections to closed periods appear under a subsequent open billing period. If additional invoices must be represented in the context of a open biling period - What is the recommended approach for practitioners  who want to associate the cost with the original billing period when the charge first occurred?

Reviewer 2: ## Attaching relevant existing and upcoming definitions for context:

> **Billing Period (FOCUS 1.3 or earlier):**  
> The time window that an organization receives an invoice for, inclusive of the start date and exclusive of the end date. It is independent of the time of usage and consumption of resources and services.

> **Charge Period (FOCUS 1.3 or earlier):**  
> The time window for which a charge is effective, inclusive of the start date and exclusive of the end date. The charge period for continuous usage should match the time granularity of the dataset (e.g., 1 hour for hourly, 1 day for daily). The charge period for a non-usage charge with time boundaries should match the period of eligibility.

> **Charge Class (FOCUS 1.3 or earlier):**  
> Indicates whether a charge represents a correction to a previously closed billing period. Charge Class is commonly used to differentiate such corrections from all other charges, including both regularly incurred charges and corrections to open billing periods.

> **Billing Period Status (FOCUS 1.4):**  
> A Billing Period Status represents the state of the billing period (i.e., open or closed). This status helps FinOps practitioners determine if the Cost and Usage data for a given period is preliminary and subject to change, or if it is finalized and ready for formal financial reporting and showback/chargeback processes.

## Key takeaways from these definitions

The points below do not introduce any new semantics. They are intended as an objective synthesis of what is already explicitly specified in the definitions above, presented together for clarity and full context.  

If you believe any of the interpretations below extend beyond what is explicitly stated in the specification, please call that out.

* **Financial vs. Temporal Dimensions:**
  * Billing Period is a financial/invoicing boundary, independent of when usage or costs occurred.
  * Charge Period provides temporal attribution — the time window for which the charge is effective.
  * The term *Billing Period* may be misinterpreted as the period when the cost was incurred. However, the definition explicitly states that it is **independent of the time of usage and consumption**. When considered together with Charge Period and Charge Class, the intended separation of concerns becomes clear.

* **Closed Billing Period != Closed for Analytical Attribution:**
  * A Closed Billing Period signals financial finality for reporting purposes.  
  * It does not remove the ability to attribute a charge to the period in which it was effective, because Charge Period retains that temporal information.

* **Correction Semantics for Closed Billing Periods:**
  * Charge Class explicitly signals whether a record is a correction to a previously closed period.  
  * This allows both financial and analytical consumers to differentiate regular charges from adjustments.

## How These Dimensions Interact

* Under the current model, corrections to a closed Billing Period are financially represented in a subsequent open Billing Period in order to preserve the financial finality of the closed period.  
* Charge Period preserves temporal applicability of the charge.  
  * For Usage records, this typically aligns with when the cost was incurred.  
  * For non-usage charges, it reflects the eligibility or effective window rather than necessarily the precise moment the liability was created.  
* For corrections to a closed billing period, `ChargeClass` flags the record as a correction to a previously closed billing period, while `BillingPeriodStart` / `BillingPeriodEnd` indicate the billing period **in which the correction is actually provided**, rather than the period in which it should have been applied.  
  *Note: Unlike the billing period in which the correction should have been applied (which can be resolved from `ChargePeriodStart` at least for usage charges) the billing period in which the correction is actually provided cannot be derived from any other column.*

## Suggestions

* Introduce a dedicated column that captures the exact datetime when the cost was incurred (per FR #1210). This would provide an unambiguous basis for temporal attribution across both usage and non-usage scenarios.

* PR #1900 currently proposes two allowed values for InvoiceStatus and BillingPeriodStatus — **Open** and **Closed**. I will elaborate on the proposal and supporting rationale separately, but for completeness I would like to note here:
  * We may want to consider introducing three values:
    * **Open:** costs may still change.
    * **Closed-Provisional:** operationally closed, but further corrections may occur.
    * **Closed-Final:** closed and guaranteed not to change without explicit request or approval.
  * With this approach:
    * If an issuer (or data generator) updates historical invoices and/or billing periods due to late-arriving costs, they should use **Closed-Provisional**.  
      * Reflects common real-world practice where late-arriving costs or adjustments may still be applied after operational closure.
    * If an issuer (or data generator) guarantees that no further material changes will occur for the specific invoice or billing period after closure (e.g., BilledCost update from 1M to 10M) without explicit request or approval, they should use **Closed-Final**.
    * The goal is not to change operational behavior overnight, but to raise transparency and auditability by making financial finality explicit and visible in the data model (i.e., explicitly represented in the data, not just described in documentation or contract).

## Summary

This model outlines how a correction to a Closed Billing Period can be financially recognized in a later open Billing Period (i.e., Closed-Final — meaning truly financially closed, not merely operationally closed), while still being analytically associated with the original period of effectiveness through Charge Period and identified as such via Charge Class.

I agree that this statement can benefit from explicitly referencing these other dimensions to make that separation clearer. Hence, I am proposing the enriched version (note: when/if we agree to introduce a distinction between Closed-Provisional and Closed-Final, we can further refine the wording accordingly).

```suggestion
If the original *closed billing period* is not reopened, corrections requiring additional invoices must be financially represented in a subsequent *open billing period* in order to preserve closed-period financial finality. Temporal attribution to the original period of effectiveness remains available through [*charge period*](glossary:chargeperiod), while [Charge Class](#datasets.costandusage.chargeclass) (a column within the Cost and Usage *FOCUS dataset*) explicitly indicates that the [*charge*](#glossary:charge) is a correction to a previously *closed billing period*.
```

Reviewer 4: Thanks @ijurica - the definitions help clarify the intent. A few follow-up questions:

On Closed-Provisional / Closed-Final: corrections can arrive at any time and are often customer-initiated (disputes, support tickets, RI true-ups). How would a provider reliably determine when to transition from Closed-Provisional to Closed-Final? If they can't make that determination consistently, does the distinction actually help practitioners or does it risk creating a false sense of finality?

On FR #1210, you noted that for non-usage charges, ChargePeriod reflects the eligibility window rather than when the liability was created. That means for non-usage corrections, practitioners can't reliably use ChargePeriod to determine which accounting period a charge belongs to. Do the correction examples cover this gap, or is that a known limitation until FR #1210 is resolved

On query patterns, for a practitioner who wants to sum everything that should appear in May's financials, including corrections that arrive later, is WHERE ChargePeriod BETWEEN '2025-05-01' AND '2025-06-01' the recommended approach? If so, should we add this to the spec guidance explicitly?

Reviewer 2: - Disputes are requested by customers.
- A use case in which the provider transitions from Provisional to Final would be when the provider will no longer perform corrections affecting invoice reconciliation without an explicit request or approval — for example, after a defined period such as one year.
- I believe FR #1210 is a known gap.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the clarifications. The Provisional-to-Final transition example (e.g., after a defined period like one year) makes sense as a provider-level policy decision. Acknowledging FR #1210 as the known gap for non-usage charge temporal attribution works for us and we can revisit the query pattern guidance once that's resolved. Good to close this thread.

See [Appendix: Invoice Handling](#appendix.invoicehandling) for more details regarding consistency and integrity of delivered Billing Period, Invoice Detail and Cost and Usage *dataset artifacts* for *closed billing periods*.

## Attribute ID

CorrectionHandling

## Attribute Name

Correction Handling

## Description

Defines how *corrections* to previously delivered FOCUS *dataset artifacts* are represented in subsequent deliveries.

## Requirements

CorrectionHandling MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its styles for representing corrections in *dataset artifacts* documented and accessible to practitioners (including whether Replacement, Delta, or Ledger style is used and under which conditions each style applies).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot of data for the affected *delivery scope* when using Replacement correction style.
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST include additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using Delta correction style.

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST include explicit reversal and re-entry additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using Ledger correction style.

Author: These anchors won't work until/unless you accept my other header hash changes...

```suggestion
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot of data for the affected *delivery scope* when using [Replacement correction style](attributes.correctionhandling.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST include additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using [Delta correction style](attributes.correctionhandling.correctionstyles.deltacorrections).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST include explicit reversal and re-entry additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using [Ledger correction style](attributes.correctionhandling.correctionstyles.ledgercorrections).
```

Reviewer 2: Depending on the outcome of [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2905862156), we can move forward with either this suggestion or [the alternative](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2880614537)

***Reminder:** Add `#` in the alternative suggestion links*

```suggestion
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot of data for the affected *delivery scope* when using [Replacement correction style](#attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST include additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using [Delta correction style](#attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.deltacorrections).
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST include explicit reversal and re-entry additive records representing corrections within the same *delivery scope* when using [Ledger correction style](#attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.ledgercorrections).
```

Author: Agree to your proposal above.  You can commit.

* *FOCUS dataset* MUST ensure that InvoiceDetail.InvoiceStatus for an *issued invoice* transitions from "Closed" to "Open" only if explicitly requested or approved by the customer.

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST ensure that BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStatus for a *closed billing period* transitions from "Closed" to "Open" only if explicitly requested or approved by the customer.

Author: These two lines are not dataset-level requirements; they're column-level requirements, and so I think they should be moved out from `Correction Handling` to live within their respective columns.  Because #1900 has not yet been approved, I'm happy to keep them here, then move them during consistency review, as that is a non-material change.

I also think they read much more clearly if phrased as a MUST NOT instead of a MUST.

Lastly: do we truly need to make any mention of "issued invoice" or "closed billing period" here?  It's just globally true that they must not move from Closed to Open, unless explicitly agreed by the customer.

```suggestion
* InvoiceDetail.InvoiceIssueStatus MUST NOT transition from "Closed" to "Open" unless explicitly requested or approved by the customer.
* BillingPeriod.BillingPeriodStatus MUST NOT transition from "Closed" to "Open" unless explicitly requested or approved by the customer.
```

Reviewer 2: generally agree.
we should also check with RM team if they have some preferences here - referring to MUST vs MUST NOT

Reviewer 2: As planned, those two requirements are relocated to corresponding columns. Resolving this thread.

| Correction Style | Delivery Mechanism | Correction Style Description                                                                                                                                              |
| ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Previously delivered records are not corrected individually; each delivery provides a complete snapshot and supersedes any previously delivered data within the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope). |
| Delta            | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records applied during aggregation and may include supplemental records as needed. |
| Ledger           | Append             | Previously delivered records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive records representing explicit reversals and re-entries, applied during aggregation, and may include supplemental records as needed. |

> For more information on delivery mechanisms for *dataset artifacts*, see the [Delivery Handling attribute](#deliveryhandling).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information on delivery mechanisms for *dataset artifacts*, see the [Delivery Handling attribute](#attributes.deliveryhandling).
```

Given that the entire change history is presented, the Ledger correction style provides full inherent auditability. Total data volume increases over time as all delivered dataset artifacts are preserved, and is typically the highest compared to other correction styles as each correction requires explicit reversal and re-entry records.

## Attribute ID

CorrectionHandling

## Attribute Name

Correction Handling

## Description

Defines how *corrections* to previously delivered FOCUS *dataset artifacts* are represented in subsequent deliveries.

## Requirements

CorrectionHandling MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* *FOCUS dataset* MUST have its styles for representing corrections in *dataset artifacts* documented and accessible to practitioners (including whether Replacement, Delta, or Ledger style is used and under which conditions each style applies).

> * *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot of data for the affected *delivery scope* when using [Replacement correction style](#attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* *FOCUS dataset* MUST represent a complete snapshot of data for the affected [*delivery scope*](#glossary:delivery-scope) when using [Replacement correction style](#attributes.correctionhandling.overview.correctionstyles.replacementcorrections).
```

Same link-once rationale: first occurrence of "delivery scope" in the Requirements section.

Reviewer 2: I’ll accept this suggestion, but I’d also like to note that it’s a bit unclear what “Section” refers to in this context and we might revisit this during the Consistency Review 🙂

AI #2128

## Attribute ID

CorrectionHandling

## Attribute Name

Correction Handling

## Description

Defines how *corrections* to previously delivered FOCUS *dataset artifacts* are represented in subsequent deliveries.

## Requirements

All corrections adhere to the following requirements:

* Dataset instance MUST have its styles for representing corrections in Dataset Instance Artifacts documented and accessible to practitioners (including whether Replacement, Delta or Ledger is used and under which conditions).
* Dataset Instance MUST NOT deliver correction that invalidates the *invoice reconciliation* when [InvoiceStatus]((#datasets.invoicedetail.invoicestatus)) is "Closed" for a given InvoiceId.
* When including correction acssociated to *closed billing period* Dataset instance adheres to the following additional requirements:
  * Dataset instance MUST NOT deliver records that results in issuing additional invoices for the given billing period.

>   * Dataset instance MAY deliver one or more records that results in issuing additional invoices for subsequent *open billing period*.

Reviewer 2: Attaching previous version:

---

* The correction style(s) used to correct FOCUS *dataset artifacts* MUST be documented by the data generator.
* Correction MUST NOT introduce a discrepancy between an *issued invoice* and its associated FOCUS *dataset artifacts*.
* Correction to a previously *closed billing period* that requires issuing additional invoices MUST result in additional charge(s) associated with a subsequent *open billing period*, with the charge period indicating when the cost was incurred.
* Correction delivered using the Append delivery mechanism adheres to the following additional requirements:
  * Correction MUST include exclusively additional charges.
  * Correction MUST NOT include updates or omissions of previously delivered charges.

* Auditability - tracing the full lifecycle of a *charge* from the original record through all subsequent corrections.

### Correction Styles

FOCUS supports three styles for correcting original records:

| Correction Style | Delivery Mechanism | Correction Style Description                                                                         |
| ---------------- | ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Original records are ignored and replaced by correction records.                                                        |
| Delta            | Append             | Original records are preserved and modified by correction records.                                             |

> | Ledger           | Append             | Original records are preserved and decremented/incremented by correction records. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Correction Style | Delivery Mechanism | Correction Style Description                                                                                        |
| ---------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Original records are not corrected individually; each delivery supersedes all previously delivered dataset artifacts for the period with a new snapshot. |
| Delta            | Append             | Original records are preserved; corrections are appended as additive adjustment records applied during aggregation. |
| Ledger           | Append             | Original records are preserved; corrections are modeled as explicit reversal and re-entry records.                  |
```

> | Ledger           | Append             | Original records are preserved; corrections are modeled as explicit reversal and re-entry records.                  |

Reviewer 2: Previous version

| Correction Style | Delivery Mechanism | Correction Style Description                                                                         |
| ---------------- | ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Replacement      | Overwrite          | Original records are ignored and replaced by correction records.                                                        |
| Delta            | Append             | Original records are preserved and modified by correction records.                                             |
| Ledger           | Append             | Original records are preserved and decremented/incremented by correction records. |

### Corrections to Closed Billing Periods

A billing period is considered closed when all expected invoices for that timeframe have been issued.

Any necessary corrections to a previously *closed billing period* that require issuing additional invoices are associated with a subsequent *open billing period*, with the charge period indicating when the cost was incurred. This approach establishes a clear temporal boundary between billing cycles, preserving the historical financial accuracy and integrity of closed billing periods while enabling transparent and auditable tracking of corrections in future periods.

## Attribute ID

CorrectionHandling

## Attribute Name

Correction Handling

## Description

Defines how *corrections* to a previously delivered FOCUS *dataset artifact* are represented in a subsequently delivered *dataset artifact*.

## Requirements

All corrections adhere to the following requirements:

* The correction style(s) used to correct FOCUS *dataset artifacts* MUST be documented by the data generator.

> * Correction MUST NOT introduce a discrepancy between an *issued invoice* and its associated FOCUS *dataset artifacts*.

Reviewer 2: alternative to consider:

```suggestion
* Correction to *issued charge* MUST NOT introduce a discrepancy with the associated *issued invoice*.
```
